# Internationalization (i18n) for Denon/Marantz AVR Integration

This project uses the Python [gettext](https://docs.python.org/3.11/library/gettext.html) module for internationalization.

- Crowdin is used to translate texts: https://crowdin.com/project/uc-integration-denon-avr
- English is used as the reference language for all translations.
  - The English text is used as the language-key, as it is commonly used in GNU gettext.
  - Exceptions are for very long texts, where a summary text is enough, or omitting web-links or other formatting options.
- Only the English .po file may be edited and committed to Git!
  - All other languages are translated by Crowdin.
  - Updated texts are pushed back as pull requests. 
- ‼️ Language texts used in the Integration-API messages are currently not single language texts but dictionaries with
     all languages.

Don't fear gettext :-)
It might seem complicated if you haven't used it before, but the integration is runnable even without updating the
language files or compiling the .po files! If a language file is missing, the language key is used which in most cases
is identical to the English language text.

## Directory Structure

The locales directory is organized as follows:

```
intg-denonavr
└── locales/
    ├── en_US/
    │   └── LC_MESSAGES/
    │       └── intg-denonavr.po
    ├── de_DE/
    │   └── LC_MESSAGES/
    │       └── intg-denonavr.po
    ├── fr_FR/
    │   └── LC_MESSAGES/
    │       └── intg-denonavr.po
    └── intg-denonavr.pot
```

- `intg-denonavr.pot`: The template file containing all translatable strings extracted from the source files.
  - This file is temporary and not committed to Git. 
- `<language>/LC_MESSAGES/intg-denonavr.po`: Translation files for each supported language.
- Country suffixes are used to prepare country-specific translations, for example `en_UK`, `de_CH`, etc.

## Working with Translations

‼️ The translated texts in the setup-flow are not single texts in a specific language, but dictionaries with all
   available languages! 

Most language texts must be included as key value pairs. Example:

```json
{
  "label": {
    "en": "Good morning",
    "fr": "Bonjour",
    "de": "Guten Morgen"
  }
}
```

See the [Integration-API](https://github.com/unfoldedcircle/core-api/tree/main/integration-api) for more information.

To support these multi-language translations without too much boilerplate code, new shorthand functions are defined
in [i18n.py](../intg-denonavr/i18n.py) which complement the common `_` translation function:

- `_a`: create a translation dictionary for all available languages (instead a single translation with `_`).
- `_am`: same as `_a` but for longer texts concatenated by multiple message ids.
- `__`: passthrough function without translation, only for text extraction with `xgettext` and `_am` helper.

See "Usage in Code" below on how to use these functions.

This might change in the future and can be easily adapted when necessary with the defined shorthand functions:
replace the custom `_a` and `_am` functions with the common `_` translation function.

### Usage in Python

Use the i18n module as follows:

```python
from i18n import _, _n, _a, _am, __

# Simple translation
print(_("Hello, world!"))

# Pluralization
count = 5
print(_n("Found %d item", "Found %d items", count) % count)

# For setup-flow messages that expect a dictionary with language codes
setup_text = _a("Setup mode")

# For longer setup-flow messages consisting of multiple messages
long_setup_text = _am(
   __("Leave blank to use auto-discovery and click _Next_."),
   "\n\n",
   __("The device must be on the same network as the remote."),
)
```

### Extracting Strings

To extract translatable strings from the source code, the `xgettext` tool should be used. Manual editing the reference
language .po file should be avoided.

```shell
xgettext -d intg-denonavr -o intg-denonavr/locales/intg-denonavr.pot --from-code=UTF-8 --language=Python \
    --add-comments=Translators --keyword=_ --keyword=_n:1,2 --keyword=__ --keyword=_a --no-wrap \
    --copyright-holder="Unfolded Circle ApS" --package-name "uc-integration-denon-avr" \
    intg-denonavr/*.py
```

- This creates the `intg-denonavr/locales/intg-denonavr.pot` template file.
- Source code file & linenumber metadata is automatically updated. 
- `--no-wrap` is used for better Crowdin merge compatibility.

To update and compile all .po files, the helper Makefile in `intg-denonavr/locales` can be used:

```shell
cd intg-denonavr/locales
make update_po
make all
```

### Updating Translation Files

‼️ Only the English reference language `en_US` should be updated. All other language files are handled by Crowdin!

```shell
LANGUAGE=en_US
msgmerge --no-wrap -U intg-denonavr/locales/$LANGUAGE/LC_MESSAGES/intg-denonavr.po \
    intg-denonavr/locales/intg-denonavr.pot
```

### Compiling Translation Files

To compile the .po files into binary .mo files that can be used by the application:

```shell
LANGUAGE=en_US
msgfmt intg-denonavr/locales/$LANGUAGE/LC_MESSAGES/intg-denonavr.po \
    -o intg-denonavr/locales/$LANGUAGE/LC_MESSAGES/intg-denonavr.mo
```

### Create New Translation Files

‼️ This is for reference and local use only. New project translation languages must be requested and created in Crowdin.

To create a new language, for example `en_UK`:

```shell
LANGUAGE=en_UK
mkdir -p "intg-denonavr/locales/$LANGUAGE/LC_MESSAGES"
msginit --no-wrap -i intg-denonavr/locales/intg-denonavr.pot \
    -o intg-denonavr/locales/$LANGUAGE/LC_MESSAGES/intg-denonavr.po \
    -l $LANGUAGE
```

# Resources

- https://docs.python.org/3.11/library/gettext.html
- https://crowdin.com/blog/2022/09/28/python-app-translation-tutorial
- https://phrase.com/blog/posts/translate-python-gnu-gettext/
- https://phrase.com/blog/posts/learn-gettext-tools-internationalization/
- https://lokalise.com/blog/beginners-guide-to-python-i18n/
